# Project Layout

If you followed the [quickstart](quick-start.md) and initialized a new EDA project with the `banners` application in it, your top level project directory would look like this:

```shell
.
├── banners # dir
├── common  # dir
├── test    # dir
├── utils   # dir
├── .env
├── .envrc
├── PROJECT
├── go.work
├── go.work.sum
├── .gitignore
├── pyproject.toml
└── ruff.toml
```

Let's cover the purpose of each directory in more detail.

## Application

The `banners` directory contains the `banners` application files that `edabuilder` created for us when we executed `edabuilder create app banners`. The contents of this app directory is covered in the [App Components](components.md) section.

## Common

The `common` directory contains the common python functions and constants that apps can use. It is auto-generated by `edabuilder` and typically should not be modified manually.

## Test

The `test` directory contains python packages that enable application unit testing. The app testing documentation is a work in progress.

## Utils

In the `utils` directory you will find shared utility functions that simplify some operations on EDA objects.

## Project

The `PROJECT` file contains the global config a project was initialized with. For example, if you are reading this after the quickstart, your project file should look similar to this:

```yaml
builderVersion: v25.12.1
domain: eda.local
name: example
registry: change.me
vendor: community
```

The `builderVersion` contains the EDA release version that is used by this particular version of the `edabuilder` tool.

The rest of the fields are self explanatory and can be provided as CLI arguments during the project instantiation.

## Go workspace

The `go.work` file defines the Go Workspace configuration and includes (via `uses` statement) all apps created in the project. Since the project may contain more than one app, the workspace makes it possible to develop multiple apps in parallel without modifying each apps's Go module file.

Most users will never need to modify the workspace file, and edabuilder will add new apps to the workspace automatically.

## Python project

You will find the `pyproject.toml` and `ruff.toml` files in the root of your project. The `pyproject.toml` file contains the Python project metadata and the `ruff.toml` file contains the Python linting rules.

Since most EDA applications are written in Python[^1][^2] as an application developer you would want to initialize a virtual environment for your EDA app project to ensure that you get code autocompletion and basic linting in place.

You may use any virtual environment tool of your choice, and in the quickstart we used `uv` to init the virtual environment by running `uv sync` while being in the project directory.

## Environment

A couple of environment files - `.envrc` and `.env` - contain environment variables that should help your editor to resolve the local python packages and select the local `.venv` as an acting python environment.

## Git ignore

And finally, you will find a `.gitignore` file that contains a list of files and directories that should be ignored by Git.

[^1]: Technically, with MicroPython runtime.
[^2]: There are two different classes of EDA apps - intent apps that are written in Python, and Controller-based apps, that can be written in any language.
